Document ID: ET050
Title: The Blue Nile Falls &amp; Gorge
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/space/the-blue-nile-falls
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: destination
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

The Blue Nile Falls & Gorge
The 18th-century Scottish traveler James Bruce described the Blue Nile Falls as ‘a magnificent sight, that ages, added to the greatest length of human life, would not efface or eradicate from my memory. Particularly in the rainy season, the waterfall known locally as Tis Isat (Water that Smokes) is a sensational sight, kicking up a thunderous wall of spray as it crashes over a 45-meter high cliff before being channeled into a frothing gorge. From the village of Tis Abay, a splendid series of full-frontal viewpoints can be reached along a 1.5km footpath across the 17th century Alata Bridge. Birders should check the riverine forest here for endemics and near-endemics such as blue-breasted bee-eater, white-cheeked turaco, black-winged lovebird, and Yellow-fronted parrot.
What to See
The road to the Blue Nile Falls is picturesque. Enjoy the staggering landscape along the route to the fall. Different bird species of soar over the fall. One of the oldest bridges in Ethiopia also found at the nose of the waterfall.
Getting There
The Blue Nile fall is accessed from the city of Bahir Dar which found 484 km from the capital Addis Ababa. Daily Ethiopian Airlines flights connect Addis Ababa and Bahirdar. The Bule Nile Falls is found 30 km away from Bahir Dar which can be accessed with a drive on a tarmac road.
Getting Around
As the place is blessed with staggering scenic views, hike around near the waterfall. The landscape, the sound of the blistering waterfall, and the droplets of the plunging fall will make your experience unforgettable.
Accommodation
Most travelers spend the night in the city of Bahir Dar which keeps dozens of high-class and budget hotels. If camping is your choice, local tour operators in Bahirdar can arrange camping near the waterfall.
Blue Nile Gorge
This natural wonder is one of the most scenic sites in North Shewa, around 200km from Addis Ababa. The gorge offers breathtaking views. It is a popular destination for nature lovers and hikers.
