Document ID: ET075
Title: Currency and Payment
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/news/hotels-star-rankings-and-results-announced
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: news
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

Travel tip
Ethiopia's official currency is the known as the Ethiopian Birr (ETB) or simply Birr. Banknotes are available in denominations of 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, and 200 Birr. Tourists can exchange foreign currencies such as USD, EUR and GBP for Ethiopian Birr upon arrival at Addis Ababa Bole International Airport and at various banks throughout the country. Banks are open between 8:00 am and 5:00 pm from Monday to Saturday. Since exchange rates fluctuate daily, it is advisable to check the websites of commercial banks in Ethiopia for the latest information.
Major credit and debit cards like Visa and MasterCard are accepted at some hotels, Ethiopian Airlines, and larger businesses, especially those catering to tourists. However, it is not advisable to rely on credit cards only, as they may not be accepted at local restaurants, shops, and in smaller towns. You can use Visa and MasterCard at ATMs in Addis Ababa and in major towns to withdraw Birr.
About Us
check the latest travel advisories and entry requirements before your trip. Enjoy your visit to Ethiopia!
Recent News
Health conference
Teninte Application launching
General Information
Adventure Travel
Experience the Rich Culture of Ethiopia
Tourism Newsletter
Digital Brochures
Categories
Ecotourism
City trips
Tags
VisitEthiopia Bot
Explore Ethiopia in chat
Explore Ethiopia
Travel • Culture • Food
Food & injera
Festivals & culture
Send
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Welcome to Ethiopia, the Land of Origins! Ethiopia invites you to discover why it is the origin of so much! As you explore this ancient land, you will be put in touch with your own origins… for this is the Land of Origins!
Newslatter Subscribe
Sign up for our mailing list to get latest updates and offers.
© 2025 Powered By Bekur. All rights reserved
Log In
Remember me
Forgot Password?
Do not have an account? Sign Up
I have read and accept the Terms and Privacy Policy
Already have an account?
