Document ID: ET082
Title: Visa Requirements
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/news/new-postunveiling-the-jewel-of-africa-wenchi-lake-completes-construction-welcoming-visitors-to-ethiopias-africa-switzerland
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: news
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

Travel tip
Ethiopia offers tourist visa to citizens of all countries provided that they have passport that are valid for at least 6 months from the intended date of entry to Ethiopia. Tourists can apply for visa online using https://www.evisa.gov.et/. Normally, the tourist visa will be ready in three days.
Tourists can apply for single-entry visas valid for up to 90 days from their intended entry date into Ethiopia. To extend a visa, tourists must submit a request to the Immigration and Citizenship Service. Travelers who overstay their visa without an extension are subject to fines and legal penalties.
As visa regulations can be updated from time to time, it is worth checking the website of the Immigration and Citizenship Service (https://www.evisa.gov.et/information/tourist) or contact the Ethiopian embassy or consulate in your home country.
About Us
check the latest travel advisories and entry requirements before your trip. Enjoy your visit to Ethiopia!
Recent News
Health conference
Teninte Application launching
General Information
Adventure Travel
Experience the Rich Culture of Ethiopia
Tourism Newsletter
Digital Brochures
Categories
Ecotourism
City trips
Tags
VisitEthiopia Bot
Explore Ethiopia in chat
Explore Ethiopia
Travel • Culture • Food
Food & injera
Festivals & culture
Send
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Welcome to Ethiopia, the Land of Origins! Ethiopia invites you to discover why it is the origin of so much! As you explore this ancient land, you will be put in touch with your own origins… for this is the Land of Origins!
Newslatter Subscribe
Sign up for our mailing list to get latest updates and offers.
© 2025 Powered By Bekur. All rights reserved
Log In
Remember me
Forgot Password?
Do not have an account? Sign Up
I have read and accept the Terms and Privacy Policy
Already have an account?
