Document ID: ET095
Title: About Ethiopia
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/page/about-ethiopia
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: travel-info
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

Ethiopia is an ancient country whose unique cultural heritage, rich history, and remarkable biodiversity are reflected in a tally of nine UNESCO World Heritage Sites – more than any other country in Africa. Within its borders, you’ll find the world’s fourth-holiest Islamic city, along with the oldest continuously occupied town south of the Sahara. Compelling antiquities include the medieval rock-hewn churches of Lalibela and Gheralta, ruined palaces and temples dating back 3,000 years, the magnificent 17th-century castles of Gondar, and the oldest human fossils unearthed anywhere on the planet. Add to this the beautiful Simien and the Bale Mountains, the spectacular volcanic landscapes of the Danakil Depression, and a wealth of mammals and birds found nowhere else in the world, and it’s little wonder that Ethiopia has become the most attractive and popular emergent tourist destination in Africa.
Ethiopia’s fascinating and enigmatic recorded history stretches back 3,000 years to the reign of the Queen of Sheba and King Solomon.
Ethiopia’s rich biodiversity is reflected in varied flora and fauna embracing more than 50 endemic species of mammals and birds, ranging from the iconic Ethiopian wolf to the spectacular Raspoli’s turaco.
A stable and peaceful democracy since 1994, Ethiopia Today is a federal state whose progressive economic policies are reflected is a post-millennial average annual growth rate of around 10 percent.
A unique musical heritage and cuisine, together with ancient coffee culture and thriving arts and crafts scene, ensure that the Ethiopian lifestyle has much to offer curious visitors.
VisitEthiopia Bot
Explore Ethiopia in chat
Explore Ethiopia
Travel • Culture • Food
Food & injera
Festivals & culture
Send
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Welcome to Ethiopia, the Land of Origins! Ethiopia invites you to discover why it is the origin of so much! As you explore this ancient land, you will be put in touch with your own origins… for this is the Land of Origins!
Newslatter Subscribe
Sign up for our mailing list to get latest updates and offers.
© 2025 Powered By Bekur. All rights reserved
Log In
Remember me
Forgot Password?
Do not have an account? Sign Up
I have read and accept the Terms and Privacy Policy
Already have an account?
