Document ID: ET096
Title: Convention Exhibition Centers
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/page/convention-exhibition-centers
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: travel-info
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

Convention and exhibition venues
Addis Ababa has a range of state-of-the-art facilities that can host international standard meetings and conferences. World-class large conference venues at the AU, UNECA, the Addis Africa International Convention and Exhibition Centre (AAICEC), and the Millennium Hall.
Addis Africa International Convention & Exhibition Centre
(AAICEC) AAICEC is a state-of-the-art modern facility currently under development in Addis Ababa; standing proud on 11 hectares of land in a prime location with easy access to Bole International Airport, AAICEC offers large flexible space for conventions and exhibitions. LEARN MORE United Nation Economic Commission for Africa Conference Center (UNECA - CC) The United Nations Conference Centre in Addis Ababa (UNCC-AA) is a blend of elegant architecture, innovative technology and professional customer service creating a seamless world class venue for organizing impactful events. LEARN MORE African Union Conference Centre (AUCC) Headquarters of the African Union, situated in the heart of Addis Ababa and inaugurated in 2012, the AU Conference Centre comprises 8 conference halls fully equipped with all IT requirements. The Nelson Mandela conference hall that hosts the annual African Union Summit bringing together all African heads of state, has a maximum capacity of 2,500 and is equipped with simultaneous translation booths. The Centre also houses a large number of caucus rooms, briefing rooms, a multi-purpose reception room, an outside amphitheater accommodating 1,000+ people and a large lobby. LEARN MORE Millennium Hall Millennium Hall offers 19,000 m2 indoor exhibition space with the largest expo hall 5,000 m2 and 4 conference rooms. The venue is in close proximity of Bole International Airport. Surrounded by multiple hotels of all standards it is considered one of the best venues for conducting exhibitions and trade fairs in the region. LEARN MORE Hotel Meeting Venues A growing number of international hotel brands – such as Hilton, Sheraton, Radisson Blu, Golden Tulip, Marriott, Hyatt Regency, and Ramada – make Addis Ababa a destination of choice for MICE. GET LIST OF HOTELS
VisitEthiopia Bot
Explore Ethiopia in chat
Explore Ethiopia
Travel • Culture • Food
Food & injera
Festivals & culture
Send
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Welcome to Ethiopia, the Land of Origins! Ethiopia invites you to discover why it is the origin of so much! As you explore this ancient land, you will be put in touch with your own origins… for this is the Land of Origins!
Newslatter Subscribe
Sign up for our mailing list to get latest updates and offers.
© 2025 Powered By Bekur. All rights reserved
Log In
Remember me
Forgot Password?
Do not have an account? Sign Up
I have read and accept the Terms and Privacy Policy
Already have an account?
