Document ID: ET106
Title: Stopover
URL: https://visitethiopia.et/page/stopover
Source: Visit Ethiopia
Topic: travel-info
License: Ministry of Tourism of Ethiopia public webpage; URL retained

Forbes Africa Special Report – Ethiopia 2025
Addis Ababa Bole international airport which is the hub for plenty of connection flights to the different corners of Africa is an ideal spot for stopover tourists. The city is full of rich and captivating history and culture. It won’t take you long to get a feel for it within a day trip.
The newly developed boutique parks; Unity, Entoto, and Sheger Parks are the right spot for people who love city parks. The outdoor market at Mercato and the souvenir shops around the Ethiopian post office headquarter is an ideal place for shopping.
Addis Ababa is also an interesting city for nightlife, The Jazz music in Bole area and the cultural restaurant that dotted across the bole and Kazanchis area give a lifetime experience.
As Ethiopia is the origin place of coffee visiting coffee shops around the piazza area is one of the intriguing experiences to be done in the city. Check the lavish museums around 5 and 6 kilo areas to elevate your knowledge of how Ethiopia is an old nation more than you could imagine.
If you are into history and historical landmarks there are a lot of important squares that keep significant monuments and icons. Go to the main city centers and you will find many astonishing landmarks.
VisitEthiopia Bot
Explore Ethiopia in chat
Explore Ethiopia
Travel • Culture • Food
Food & injera
Festivals & culture
Send
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Welcome to Ethiopia, the Land of Origins! Ethiopia invites you to discover why it is the origin of so much! As you explore this ancient land, you will be put in touch with your own origins… for this is the Land of Origins!
Newslatter Subscribe
Sign up for our mailing list to get latest updates and offers.
© 2025 Powered By Bekur. All rights reserved
Log In
Remember me
Forgot Password?
Do not have an account? Sign Up
I have read and accept the Terms and Privacy Policy
Already have an account?
