Document ID: ET109
Title: Holqa Sof Omar: Natural and Cultural Heritage (Sof Omar: Caves of Mystery)
URL: https://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/5651/
Source: UNESCO World Heritage Centre
Topic: tentative-list
License: CC BY-SA IGO 3.0

Justification of Outstanding Universal Value
Sof Omar Cave System features a spectacular limestone karst landscape with its underground river, irregular lime stone sinks, cave passages and caverns. It represents exceptional geological processes, krastic limestone landforms, and physiographic features that would qualify the site to be considered as a place of the most significant geological and geomorphological formations. The concentration of caves and karstic limestone land formations with its geomorphic and structural characteristics is an outstanding geological feature which allows a greater understanding of the Earth's history.
The caves are profoundly important for their classic features of underground geomorphology, demonstrating an evolutionary history of millions of years. Caves and krasts are important as store houses of past climates, vegetation, fauna and human cultures, and the same is true for Sof Omar cave system. Sof Omar cave system is estimated to have been created between 23 and 5.3 Million of years B.P., in the Miocene geological period.
The outstanding universal natural heritage values of Sof Omar Cave System can precisely be stated in terms of the following two basic perspectives:
- Sof Omar cave system is an outstanding example to represent the major stage in the earth's evolutionary history.
- Sof Omar cave system contains superlative natural phenomena or areas of exceptional natural beauty and natural aesthetic significance.
The karst features of the cave system, the spectacular limestone pinnacles, the cave passages and the underground stream as a singular outstanding cultural landscape demonstrate the incomparable geological and natural phenomenon it is endowed with. This reveals the story of the cave systems formation over hundreds of millions of years, and helps unlock the story of the earth's history.
As a sacred place of worship Sof Omar cave system is believed to be the Caves of Mystery where the ancestral cult of Sheik Sof Omar Ahmad, his families and descendants is observed and practiced annually. Each and every cave structures are assigned and designated to diverse ritual practices. Annual festive events with comprehensive Islamic religious processions and traditional beliefs and practices are conducted in the cave shrines and mosques of this underground karstic limestone caverns. Thus this site has exceptional cultural significance to the spiritual life of the Islamic community making pilgrims visit this site of outstanding cultural values as specified under the above criteria (iii), (v) and (vi). These ancestral cult beliefs and practices have revived for nearly 1000 years and are still a living culture for the Islamic community of this part of the region.
Statements of authenticity and/or integrity
Sof Omar Cave system and associated powerful spiritual meanings with outstanding cultural and natural values have a high degree of authenticity and integrity. The integrity of the cave system has been sustained through cult practices by the spiritual guardians of this sacred cave system with life time dedication; while performing their religious duty and providing ecclesiastical services to the community. The impacts are predominantly the result of the activities of these spiritual guardians although tourism also has the potential to uphold the values.
The cave system, and the powerful meaning and mystery associated to this site as a holy place, are exceptional testimony to the cultural tradition which is still living and provide a significant chapter in the story of human occupation of cave shelters for religious purposes. Thus one can consider this combined feature of the cave system with the ritual practices to be exceptionally beautiful and inspirational.
The authenticity lies in the formation of the caverns, cave passages with underground stream and spectacular karstic landform which are dramatically sculptured structures, unrivalled in their scale, extent, grandeur with diversity of forms that can rarely be found anywhere in the world. Thus there is no doubt that Sof Omar Cave system is extremely impressive, which can be authenticated by anybody who managed to go through the 16 km cave passage following the underground stream as the natural road map to the outlet.
Comparison with other similar properties
Caverns like Sof Omar Cave System and Karst landforms are more commonly associated with limestone landscapes and erosion processes of high energy streams.
Thus the majority of caverns and karst landforms already inscribed on the World Heritage List are found in limestone landscapes. There are World Heritage Sites inscribed specifically for their Cave system and Karst land forms which we can compare to this Sof Omar cave system that we are applying for nomination. Some of the most important world heritage sites for comparison are stated as follows.
World Heritage Sites of caverns in limestone karst formations
Property
Country
Inscribed
Under Old Criteria
1.
Puerto-Princesa Subterranean River National Park
Philippines
1999
N (iii), (iv)
2.
Gunung Mulu National Park
Malaysia
2000
N (I ),(ii),(iii),(iv)
3.
Carlsbad Caverns National Park
USA
1995
N (i), (iii)
4.
Mammoth Cave National Park
USA
1981
N (i), (iii), (iv)
5.
Skocjan Caves
Slovenia
1986
N (ii), (iii)
Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48th session (2026) 47th session (2025)
General Assembly 26th GA (2027) 25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who
The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America
Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners
Activities All our activities Volunteer
Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ...
Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance
More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now!
UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert
Policies Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
Global Strategy
Tentative Lists
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026
top
×
You don't have your Password or Username
Please enter your email. You will receive a message with the process to get your password.
Search
×
Login
Please enter your username
Your password
remember my profile
Forgot your username or password?
Become a member
Previous
Next
Login
