Document ID: ET108
Title: Dirre Sheik Hussein Religious, Cultural and Historical Site
URL: https://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/5649/
Source: UNESCO World Heritage Centre
Topic: tentative-list
License: CC BY-SA IGO 3.0

Justification of Outstanding Universal Value
Derrie Sheik Hussein as a holy site is an exceptional example displaying noteworthy development in terms of diversity of cultural expressions and the expansion of the Islamic culture to the south eastern Ethiopia.
The holy sites possess profound cultural significance to demonstrate outstanding universal values from the following basic perspectives.
First; the aesthetic values are manifested in the architectural features of Dine Sheik Hussien mosques, shrines and other groups of buildings as well as associated other structural elements in the walled settlement of this impressive Islamic cultural property.
Second; the site has exceptional social values by providing a multitude of living cultural services. It is a place of pilgrimage, a centre and school of Islamic thoughts, a sacred place of ritual practices, ancestral cults, and indigenous traditional beliefs. All these factors demonstrate the uniqueness of the site and justify the outstanding universal values that the site should deserve.
Third; the holy site witnessed important historical developments in the domain of cultural activities since its foundation. The venerated Saint Sheik Nur Hussein, his families and descendants succeeded in transforming this place into a holy site of pilgrimage with a Holy Ka'aba (like the one found in Mecca) in the main compound to represent the holy site of Mecca, in this remote part of Africa. The site is commonly considered as the Little Mecca in Ethiopia. This factor would evidently also qualify the site to be included in the World Heritage list under the criteria mentioned below.
Fourth; Dine Sheik Hussein Islamic holy site has profound anthropological importance when we consider the powerful meanings of the festive events, ritual objects, costumes and traditions that are strongly associated to the site and retained to the present.
Statements of authenticity and/or integrity
Dine Sheik Hussein is a well preserved site under the direct jurisdiction of the local religious community who consider themselves as the guardians of the ancestral cult that is strongly associated with the founder venerated saint Sheik Nur Hussein, his families, descendants and disciples. In addition to the Authority for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (ARCCH), the local authorities of the government, the Regional Culture and Tourism Bureau are also providing professional domain and technical support in the preservation of this cultural property in their own perspective. The cultural integrity of the community, the diversity of expressions and practices associated with the site and the cultural property are well retained to the present, and have their own completeness.
The architectural features of the mosques, shrines, the walled compound and its 12 gates, and other cultural spaces of the site are as credible now as they were in their original contexts.
The Islamic religious practices along with other traditional belief and practices have been retained for nearly a thousand years that prove the tangible and intangible authenticity of the cultural property. Dine Sheik Hussein, Ethiopia's most important place of Muslim pilgrimage, is situated on the borders of Arsi and Bale sub regions and quite close to the border of Eastern Harerge sub region. The site is visited twice a year during two most important occasions by
many thousands of pilgrims mainly from all over Eastern Ethiopia, and comprises a large complex of mosques, shrines, and tombs surrounded by a stout wall.
There are also a number of man-made caves and artificial ponds in the area as cultural spaces for diverse ritual practices. A holy white chalk from the caves is taken back by the pilgrims to many parts of the country. Every pilgrim adorns his/her face with this white chalk as religious duty in the observance of conducting ritual practices during his/her stay in the holy site of the Muslim community. Every Muslim of this region has to undertake a pilgrimage to the site at list once in his /her life time.
Comparison with other similar properties
This Islamic holy site, as a place of pilgrimage, has a spiritual comparison to the Holy city of Mecca, though it is a small rural walled settlement area in terms of size. Derrie Sheik Hussein is considered as the little Mecca for Ethiopian Islamic community, like Lalibela is considered as the Little Jerusalem for Ethiopian Christian community.
From aesthetic points of values the mosques, shrines, groups of buildings and settlement patterns of the walled compound and courts are typical of the walled city of Harar, differing only by the size of the settlement.
Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48th session (2026) 47th session (2025)
General Assembly 26th GA (2027) 25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who
The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America
Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners
Activities All our activities Volunteer
Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ...
Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance
More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now!
UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert
Policies Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
Global Strategy
Tentative Lists
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026
top
×
You don't have your Password or Username
Please enter your email. You will receive a message with the process to get your password.
Search
×
Login
Please enter your username
Your password
remember my profile
Forgot your username or password?
Become a member
Previous
Next
Login
