Document ID: ET110
Title: Lake Tana Island Monasteries and its Adjacent Wetland Natural and Cultural Heritages
URL: https://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/6580/
Source: UNESCO World Heritage Centre
Topic: tentative-list
License: CC BY-SA IGO 3.0

Justification of Outstanding Universal Value
Criterion (iii): The Lake Tana Island Monasteries incorporates the largest clusters of architectural ensembles in the world, illustrating the development of church design over 700 years. The wall painting decorating the monasteries, constitutes the only example of a complete and largely preserved set of the early modern period scenic wall painting in Africa, are of great significance to the art of history.
Criterion (v): The Lake Tana and its adjacent Wetland is an outstanding example of human use of the aquatic landscape where human and nature have been living in harmony since time began at Lake Tana to the present day. Farming practices and land management system reflect centuries of tradition which survive to the present day.
Criterion (vi): The Lake Tana Island Monasteries provide an exceptional testimony to the civilization of medieval Ethiopia, from its inception of the introduction of Christianity in the region in the 4th century AD, to the present day. The inaccessibility of the Islands except by water merited the monasteries to be the political and spiritual centre of the Mediaeval Ethiopian Empire and to continue their spiritual function up to the present day.
Criterion (x): The property provide a sanctuary to wider varieties of flora and fauna, many of which are endemic species found nowhere else in the world. The biodiversity diversities of the lake include threatened species of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science or conservation.
Statements of authenticity and/or integrity
Integrity
The proposed boundaries of the Island monasteries and its adjacent wetland include all the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value. The integrity of the aquatic landscape has been maintained under the direct jurisdiction of Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahido Church and the Amara Regional state. Since 2015 Lake Tana and its adjacent wetland has registered as a Biosphere Reserve site by UNESCO. The water shed of the Blue Nile from the outlet of Lake to the Tis Abbay Falls has been designated as the Blue Nile Riverside Park since 2008. Thus, the physical fabrics of the property have not suffered from the adverse effects of development. The ecclesiastical treasures retained by the churches, are authentic ritual objects and represent an outstanding collection of religious art and artefacts.
Authenticity
The spectacular natural aquatic landscape and its Island monasteries are well preserved sites uphold a high level of authenticity in their present state. The imposing monasteries their subsidiary establishments retain their original form, design and materials, in their original setting, with few subsequent alterations. The use and function of the religious monuments have survived unchanged and follow the traditions of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, which are thought to preserve the oldest Christian liturgical music. The spirit and feeling of the aquatic landscape survives from the establishment of Christianity in the area and it became a hub of religious and spiritual devotion.
Comparison with other similar properties
There are several Island Lakes, aquatic landscape and monastic architecture inscribed as World Heritage, some of these being the Rock Islands Southern Lagoon (Palau), the Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated Ecosystems (France), Kenya Lake System in the Great Rift Valley (Kenya), Lake Turkana National Parks, (Kenya) and Lake Malawi National Park (Malawi). The Monastic Island of Reichenau (Germany), the Fasil Ginb( Ethiopia)
The Rock Islands Southern Lagoon is a mixed site and consists of numerous forested limestone islands within a marine lagoon supporting rich biodiversity. The Lagoons of New Caledonia represent diversity of coral reefs and associated ecosystems. The Kenya Lake system comprises of 3 interlinked alkaline shallow lakes and supports some of the highest bird diversities in the world, including many endangered species. Lake Turkana comprises the largest saline desert lake in the world surrounded by an arid landscape often devoid of life but serves as a stopover for migratory birds and as major breeding grounds for the Nile crocodile, hippopotamus and a variety of venomous snakes. Lake Malawi with its deep clean waters is renowned for its fish biodiversity.
The Fasil Gibi of Gondar represents a master piece of vernacular architecture and fine arts of painting.
The Lake Tana Islands and its adjacent Wetland shares some attributes with each but in itself presents a unique case, as the source of the Nile, the longest river basin in the world and the largest ground of intra African migratory birds. It provides sanctuary to wider varieties of flora and fauna, many of which are endemic species. The Lake holds nearly 65 fish species and of which 15 of them is endemic. The propose heritage and its associated Wetland also holds a minimum of 20,000 water birds colonies of 217 bird species.
Apart from its amazing biodiversity, Lake Tana Islands and its adjacent Wetland site is unique in its aesthetic and rich cultural heritage. It has been serving as the political and spiritual center of the Ethiopian Christian Empire for centuries. During the mediaeval periods the Island monasteries of Lake Tana were the political and spiritual center of the Christian empire. It used as a place of safe haven for Christian people during the time of adversity .Remains of ancient Ethiopian emperors and invaluable treasures are kept in the island monasteries.
The island monasteries of situated on the aquatic land scape and the water gates have their own buildings techniques and styles. It is also a unique contributor to religious syncrism as a global phenomenon. The Ethiopian Orthodox Christian church has been thoroughly indigenized in the course of a nearly two thousand years long history of Christianity, attained the status of known as Ethiopianism, which is almost accepted as a contribution to the African cultural nationalism and particularly based on a self-conscious cultivation of African indigenous values and attitude.
Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48th session (2026) 47th session (2025)
General Assembly 26th GA (2027) 25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who
The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America
Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners
Activities All our activities Volunteer
Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ...
Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance
More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now!
UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert
Policies Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
Global Strategy
Tentative Lists
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026
top
×
You don't have your Password or Username
Please enter your email. You will receive a message with the process to get your password.
Search
×
Login
Please enter your username
Your password
remember my profile
Forgot your username or password?
Become a member
Previous
Next
Login
