Document ID: ET113
Title: Simien Mountains National Park (SMNP)
URL: https://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/6651/
Source: UNESCO World Heritage Centre
Topic: tentative-list
License: CC BY-SA IGO 3.0

Justification of Outstanding Universal Value
The Simien Mountains National Park that was already nominated and listed as a world heritage site in 1978 satisfy criteria vii and x for outstanding universal value. The property comprises of a spectacular landscape that is part of the Simien mountain massif, located on the northern limit of the main Ethiopian plateau. The undulating plateau of the Simien mountains has over millions of years been eroded to form precipitous cliffs and deep gorges of exceptional natural beauty. Some cliffs reach 1,500 m in height and the northern cliff wall extends for some 35 km. The mountains are bounded by deep valleys to the north, east and south, and offer vast vistas over the rugged-canyon like lowlands below. In some places, the escarpment forms high elevations that provide splendid natural lookout points such Gidir Got, Imet Gogo and Ras Dejen which offer unparalleled panoramas along the high plateau and down the lowland areas. With good weather stunning views of natural beauty up to 100 kilometers over the valleys are possible. The Simien Mountains is part of the 800-kilometer-wide mountain system of Ethiopia, formed out of a combination of volcanic activity and uplifting. It is the largest highland area above 3,000 m in Africa and has been described as the “roof of Africa”.  The highest point in the Horn of Africa, Ras Dejen at 4,543m, is found in Simien Mountain National Park.
A combination of diverse altitudinal variation, unique climate and isolation have given rise to a number of rare and endemic species in the Simien Mountains National Park found nowhere else globally. The park falls within the Afro-alpine Centre of Plant Diversity and the Eastern Afro-montane biodiversity hotspot. It is home to a number of endemic and globally threatened species. The cliff areas of the park are the main habitat of the endangered Walia ibex (Capra walie), a wild mountain goat which is endemic to the Simien Mountains, while the Afro-alpine grasslands and heathlands are home to the endangered Ethiopian wolf or Simien fox (Canis simiensis), considered to be the rarest canid species in the world and the Gelada baboon (Theropithecus gelada), both of which are endemic to the Ethiopian highlands.
Other mammals include hamadryas baboon (papio hamadryas), serval cat (Felis serval), leopard (Panthera pardus), caracal (Felis caracal), wild cat (Felis Silvestris), spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta), golden jackal (Canis aureus), and some large herbivores including bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus), common duiker (sylvicapra grimmia), and klipspringer (Oreotragus oreotragus). The bird list for the park includes some 130 bird species. Flagship birds include lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus), Verreaux's eagle (Aquila yerreauxii), kestrel (Falco tinnunculus), lanner falcon (F. Biarmicus) and augur buzzard (Buteo rufofuscus). In Simien Mountains National Park, a total of 21 mammals have been recorded, with ten (10) endemics and 130 bird species, including seven (7) endemics.
Plant diversity includes a mixture of Afro-Alpine woods, heath forest, high montane vegetation, montane savanna and montane moorland with tree heath (Erica arborea), giant lobelia (Lobelia rhynchopetalum), yellow primrose (Primula yerticillata), everlastings Helichrysum spp. Ridge tops and gorge sides support coarse grassland with herbs (Thymus spp., Trifolium spp., Geranium arabicum). There are over 1,200 plant species in the park of which 3 are only found in the Simien Mountains National Park: Festucca gilbertiana, Rosularia simiensis and Dianthus longiglumi. Rosa abyssinica (Abyssinian rose) is found only in Africa and Yemen, while Juniperous procera, Hagenia abyssinica, Olea Africa and Cordia Africana also found in Simien are threatened.
A distinct and extensive Ericaceous belt (often termed ‘Sub-Afroalpine’) occurs between 2,700 and 3,700 m in the Simien Mountains National Park which does not correspond to the altitudinal range of similar Ericaceous zones on the mountains of tropical East Africa like Mt Kenya, Mt Kilimanjaro and Mt Rwenzori.
The scenic natural beauty as a result of geological processes and weathering are stunning while the endemic walia ibex, a wild mountain goat found nowhere else in the world is astounding. The Ethiopian wolf (also described as the golden wolf) and the Gelada baboon (often described as the bleeding-heart baboon) are natural beauties. All of these including the endemic plant communities and rare and endemic birds constitute the Universal Outstanding Natural Value of Simien Mountains National Park.
With a sound and sustained conservation and management program that the Ethiopian government is committed different and very key activities (resettlement of Gich and Arquaziye villages and open corridors, incorporate key walia habitats into the park from janamora woreds, incorporate key Ethiopian wolf habitats and spectacular views from beyeda woreda- this includes the highest pick of the country ‘ras dejen’ and the limalimo forest from debark woreda). These significant area modifications increased the park area from 136km2 to 412km2)
In addition to the significant boundary modification the Ethiopia government work strongly to significantly decrease the threat of the property in collaboration with local leaders and partners and made the area free from grazing, cultivation and deforestation which provided  adequate habitats  for the 3 iconic species (Walia ibex, Ethiopian wolf and Gelada Monkey population) and a legal guarantee for the protection of the entire afro-alpine and afro-montane vegetation communities on a scenic landscape, cliffs, gorges and escarpment in the property.
Statements of authenticity and/or integrity
It is recalled that Great effort had been made by the state party to address the tough benchmarks set by UNESCO IUCN mission in 1996 to maintain the integrity of the property and remove the park from the world heritage endangered list. These includes re-demarcation of the park boundary which made possible to extend important habitats of the three iconic species (Walia Ibex, Ethiopian wolf and Gelada Monkey); voluntary relocation of the Arquazia and then Gich people outside the park.
The park surrounding areas are inhabited by humans who are in one way or another depends on the resources of the park including livestock grazing, harvesting trees and other vegetation, cultivation or some marginal settlements. Currently, threats to the integrity of the property include some scattered human settlements along the margin of the park, cultivation and soil erosion, frequent fires in the tree heather forest; grazing (though it is being controlled currently). The current boundaries of the property include key areas essential for maintaining the scenic values of the property and to protect the iconic species of the property. A number of important strategic plan have been put in place and effort continued to ensure their practical implementations with collaboration conservation partners and stallholders. These includes: the park General Management plan, tourism development plan, Grazing pressure reduction strategy and integrated fire management plan.
The population of the endangered and iconic species have been observed to increase over the last decades; the livestock grazing almost controlled since the implementation of the GPRS in 2017 and about 82% of the park land under core protection zone (free from domestic grazing); vast area of the natural habitats of the property has been rehabilitated.
Apart from the abandoned Gich relocated people land, the three extensions to the Simien Mountains National Park (the Masarerya and the Limalimo Wildlife Reserves and the Ras Dejen Mountain and Silki-Kidis Yared sectors) and their interlinking corridors are free of human settlement and cultivation and support the key species that are central to the Outstanding Universal Value of the park. Effort is also underway to finalize the road construction to divert the public roads traversing the park. Generally, the newly added natural land are not only the most important for the survival of the iconic species, but are also very important for in situ conservation of a number of important mammal, bird, plant, and amphibian species associated with the corresponding afro alpine and sub afroalpine habitats.
Comparison with other similar properties
Simien Mountains National Park can be compared in global terms with the following sites:
Maloti Drakensberg park (world heritage listed in 2000 with Criteria: (i)(iii)(vii)(x))
The Simien mountains compares to the Maloti Drakensberg in Southern Africa as they both comprise of igneous basalts that have been eroded to form precipitous cliffs and deep valley systems. However, they show significant differences between them in terms of their geology, geomorphology and their diversity of plants and animal species.
Grand Canyon (1979):
The only other comparison in terms of geology and geomorphological features is the Grand Canyon in Colorado, United States of America, but again the plant and animal life are very different.
Rwenzori National Park, Uganda (1994):
It was included in the list of WHS to protect mountain and forest habitats and their associated fauna and flora communities. But the land formation, landscape, the flora and fauna is different from SMNP.
Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve (1981):
This park is smaller in size like Simien Mountains National Park and it’s included in the WHL to protect high elevation grassland plateau, forest and the associated rich fauna and flora. But the land formation, landscape, the flora and fauna is different from SMNP.
Kilimanjaro National Park, Kenya (1987):
This park was inscribed to the WHL because of its exceptional natural beauty, rare and endangered plants, and animal species similar to SMNP but the land formation, landscape, the flora and fauna is quite different from SMNP.
Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48th session (2026) 47th session (2025)
General Assembly 26th GA (2027) 25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who
The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America
Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners
Activities All our activities Volunteer
Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ...
Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance
More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now!
UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert
Policies Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
Global Strategy
Tentative Lists
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026
top
×
You don't have your Password or Username
Please enter your email. You will receive a message with the process to get your password.
Search
×
Login
Please enter your username
Your password
remember my profile
Forgot your username or password?
Become a member
Previous
Next
Login
