Document ID: ET112
Title: Sacred Landscapes of Tigray
URL: https://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/6301/
Source: UNESCO World Heritage Centre
Topic: tentative-list
License: CC BY-SA IGO 3.0

Justification of Outstanding Universal Value
Criterion (ii): The rock-hewn and built churches of the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray, the wall-paintings inside them and the treasures they have accumulated over the centuries illustrate the development of the original Axumite civilisation of northern Ethiopia and the ways in which it was able to receive and assimilate cultural influences from outside, despite the apparent geographical isolation of the Ethiopian highland plateau, initially through the acceptance of Christianity, received from 4th-century Egypt (before it had become the official religion of the Roman empire), the Nine Syrian Saints, who arrived from the Byzantine empire in the 5th / 6th century and founded a series of monasteries which remained important centres of learning and religious practice, and, in the 15th century, artistic influence of the Italian renaissance. These successive influences and the way they were assimilated and became an integral part of Ethiopian culture are richly illustrated by the artistic heritage of Sacred Landscapes of Tigray, which covers almost the whole period of Ethiopian wall-painting, from the 11th / 12th to 20th centuries.
Criterion (iii): The monuments of the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray provide an exceptional testimony to the civilization of medieval Ethiopia, from its inception with the conversion of the empire of Axum to Christianity in the 4th century AD, until its destruction as a result of the invasions of the 16th century. Nevertheless, the isolated position of this series of monuments within the Gheralta, Tembien and Atsbi massifs, as well as their rock-hewn construction, enabled them to survive this cataclysm, to develop and to continue their function in the post-medieval period up to the present.
Criterion (iv): The Sacred Landscapes of Tigray incorporates the largest group of rock-hewn architectural ensembles in the world, illustrating the development of church design over 1,500 years. The built churches provide the earliest surviving examples in the world of the use of timber to create structures, illustrating the importance of wood as one of the primary materials in the development of architecture.
Criterion (v): The Sacred Landscapes of Tigray bear exceptional testimony to human ingenuity in the use of the natural geology to create outstanding architecture within a sacred landscape, where practical difficulties in reaching many of the monuments contribute to the spiritual experience.
Criterion (vi): The Sacred Landscapes of Tigray and their rock-hewn monuments are inextricably associated with the development of Christian beliefs and monastic ideals in an Ethiopian cultural milieu over a long period of time, from the establishment of Christianity in the 4th century, to the religious renaissance associated with the Nine Syrian Saints in the 5th / 6th centuries, the monastic revival in the 14th century to the survival of monasticism today. The spiritual practices associated with the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray preserve in an Ethiopian context a living survival of the oldest forms of Christian monasticism as originally developed by the Desert Fathers in Egypt in the 3rd century AD and popularised by St Anthony.
Statements of authenticity and/or integrity
Integrity: The proposed boundaries of the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray include all the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value. The integrity of the Landscapes has been maintained by the continuation of traditional farming practices in the areas where there are settlements, but much of the preserved natural Landscapes is mountainous, with the only human use being access paths utilised by clergy and worshippers visiting the rock-hewn churches for religious purposes. The churches themselves retain original form from when they were hewn from the rock between the 5th century AD and the end of the Middle Ages. In many cases the churches contain ancient liturgical objects which have been preserved in their original locations over the centuries. The physical fabric of the property of the churches as a group has not suffered from the adverse effects of development or vandalism and threats are therefore limited. Where there are problems caused by fragmentation or decay of rock structures or by water percolation, which adversely affects the rock and any wall-paintings on the surface of the rock, this is the subject of current scientific study which informs preventive conservation measures. The ecclesiastical treasures retained by the churches, especially monastic churches, are authentic ritual objects received as donations from believers from the 12th century onwards and represent an outstanding collection of religious art and artefacts.
Authenticity: The spectacular natural landscapes of Gheralta, Tembien and Atsbi survive without threat from development. What agriculture takes place within the proposed boundaries follows farming practices which reflect centuries of tradition which survive to the present day and reflect a traditional land-management system. The rock-hewn churches retain their original form, design and materials,in their original setting, with few subsequent alterations. The use and function of the religious monuments has survived unchanged and follows the traditions of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, which are thought to preserve the oldest Christian liturgical music.The spirit and feeling of the sacred landscape survives from the period when the churches were first carved from the rock and it became a focus of religious and spiritual devotion.
Comparison with other similar properties
The Rock-hewn Churches, Lalibela (Ethiopia), were inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1978. They consist of eleven churches in three groups situated close together in Roha, the former capital of the Zagwe dynasty, in what is now the town of Lalibela, named after the eponymous king who is traditionally considered to have been responsible for all eleven churches in the late 12th / early 13th century. However, the most recent scholarship suggests that they were hewn over a longer period. Lalibela is comparable to Sacred Landscapes of Tigray in terms of containing rock-hewn monuments in a style derived from Axumite architecture, but is a much smaller area without comparable links to a spectacular natural landscape.
Göreme National Park and the Rock Sites of Cappadocia (Turkey) were inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1985. Secular cave dwellings may date back to the 4th century AD, but the churches are later in date. The brief synthesis notes that the site retains “the fossilized image of a province of the Byzantine Empire between the 4th century and the arrival of the Seljuk Turks (1071). Thus, they are the essential vestiges of a civilization which has disappeared”. This is in contrast to the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray, where the culture responsible for the monuments is still alive today and where the monuments remain in active use, in contrast to Cappadocia, where the churches are “dead” monuments. Following the exchange of populations between Turkey and Greece in 1923, most of the wall-paintings in Cappadocia were vandalised and in consequence have had to be heavily restored, in contrast to Tigray, where there has been no significant problem of vandalism and where the monuments therefore retain a higher level of integrity.
The Rock-Hewn Churches of Ivanovo (Bulgaria) were inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1979. The site consists of five principal (but small) rock-hewn churches, noted for their 14th-century wall-paintings, with other chapels and cells of the monks. Ivanovo was abandoned during the Middle Ages and cannot be compared with Sacred Landscapes of Tigray as a continuously living site, or in terms of scale or length of use.
Vardzia-Khertvisi, on the Georgian Tentative List, includes the rock-hewn monastery of Vardzia. This contains one principal church and a smaller church. The main church, of the Dormition of the Virgin, dates the 12th century and contains an important cycle of wall paintings, but is really a built structure within a large modified cave rather than an example of rock-hewn architecture. However, most of the site consists of the cells of the monks and connecting passages. The site was abandoned after the arrival of the Ottomans in l578. Vardzia is single site and is therefore not comparable with the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray as groups of monuments.Although there are a few monks living again at Vardzia following the collapse of Communism; it lacks the historic continuity which is one of the main features of the Gheralta, Tembien and Atsbi Sacred Landscapes.
Sümela Monastery (the Monastery of the Virgin Mary), on the Turkish Tentative List, is located on the side of a mountain. The main church is a cave with 18th-century wall-paintings. The monastery was founded in the 4th century and remained in use until 1923 butis now not a living religious site. The standing structures are almost entirely of post-medieval date and it is not comparable to the monuments of the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray in terms of date, because it is a single monastery and because the church is a modified cave rather than true rock-hewn architecture. Finally, the art of Cappadocia, Ivanovo, Sumela and Vardzia is either Byzantine or Byzantine in inspiration and is very different from the eastern Christian art to be seen in the Tigray sacred landscapes.
The Monastery of Geghard and the Upper Azat Valley (Armenia) was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 2000. Although though to have been founded in the 4th century, the visible structures date from the 12th century onwards. Two rock-hewn churches and an adjacent princely grave date from the second half of the thirteenth century, while the main church is a built structure, dating from the end of the 13th century. The monastery has remained in use up to the present, even through the Soviet period. Geghard is a single monastic site and cannot therefore be compared to the Sacred Landscapes of Tigray, which are a complex of sites.
The Sacred Landscapes of Tigray are therefore unique as large and complex sacred landscapes containing numerous rock-hewn monuments with a cultural continuity of more than 1,600 years, with a high degree of authenticity and integrity.
Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48th session (2026) 47th session (2025)
General Assembly 26th GA (2027) 25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who
The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America
Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners
Activities All our activities Volunteer
Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ...
Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance
More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now!
UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert
Policies Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
Global Strategy
Tentative Lists
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026
top
×
You don't have your Password or Username
Please enter your email. You will receive a message with the process to get your password.
Search
×
Login
Please enter your username
Your password
remember my profile
Forgot your username or password?
Become a member
Previous
Next
Login
