Document ID: ET127
Title: Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Abijatta_Shalla_Lakes_National_Park
Source: Wikivoyage
Topic: travel-guide
License: CC BY-SA 4.0

Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park
Abijatta-Shalla Lakes National Park is in the southern Oromia region of Ethiopia, about 200 km south of the capital of Addis Ababa.
Understand
History
Landscape
Thousands of flamingoes create pink carpets in the blue bays of the lake; great white pelicans soar in from Lake Shala to enjoy the fishing and execute their fantastic ballet; pied kingfishers hover and dive; fish eagles protect their territory with their eerie cry; cormorants and darters fill the dead acacia trees silhouetting strange and beautiful shapes against the sunset. Here are tall marabou stalks and sacred ibis. Snipe, stilt, avocet dwell sometimes in the hundreds of thousands, the black heron searches the shallow water in the shadow created by his black umbrella.
Flora and fauna
Warthogs, ostriches and flamingoes are common.
Climate
The National Park and this part of Ethiopia as a whole can be visited during the rainy season: dirt roads in the area not that slippery, even at the end of July or the beginning of September.
Get in
By car
Routes through Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park
Modjo ← Ziway ← N Highway 6 S → Shashemene → Hawassa
From Addis Ababa, Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park is 210 km via Modjo, using the Addis Ababa–Adama Expressway (3 hours 15 minutes drive), or it's 228 km via Butajira (3 hours 45 minutes drive).
The 7.527538.66621 park entrance is in between the two lakes, on national Highway 6, 47 km south from Ziway and 41 km north from Shashemene.
Fees and permits
Ethiopian National Park fees
Entrance fees:
Ethiopians - 20 birr
Children <12years old & Ethiopian students of any age - 10 birr
Residents - 50 birr
Non-resident foreigners - 90 birr
camping fees - 10 birr/person
As of September 2015.
Get around
7°30′0″N 38°36′0″E
Map of Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park
See
Do
Buy
Eat
Drink
Sleep
Lodging
No lodge exists inside the park. The possibilities within less than 1 hour's drive are to find hotels in Ziway or Shashemene or to go to one of the expensive resorts of Lake Langano. The closest town, Bulbula, doesn't seem to have any hotel.
Camping
Backcountry
Stay safe
Go next
