Document ID: ET139
Title: Bole International Airport
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Bole_International_Airport
Source: Wikivoyage
Topic: travel-guide
License: CC BY-SA 4.0

Bole International Airport
Bole International Airport (ADD IATA) is the main airport of Ethiopia and one of the busiest hubs in all of Africa. It is 6 km southeast from the centre of Addis Ababa.
Understand
Bole International Airport is the hub for Ethiopian Airlines, the largest airline in Africa. Ethiopian has several times more destinations than the other airlines combined, from African, European, Asian, North and South American destinations. If you travel nonstop from somewhere further away, you will fly on Ethiopian. Other than that, airlines from the Middle East, North and East Africa serve Addis Ababa from their home bases.
The airport has over 500 flights per day and serves 22 million passengers per year.
Flights
Bole has four terminals:
Terminal 1
Dedicated to domestic flights.
Terminal 2
Dedicated to international flights.
Terminal 3
Reserved for guests at the Ethiopian Skylight Hotel.
Terminal 4
The largest and newest terminal.
Ground transportation
Access into the terminals is restricted, as of July 2019. Taxis and anyone who comes to meet you will be out in the carpark, though a dozen of the top hotels still have a booth inside the arrivals area. Similar rules apply at the other airports in the country, for both arrivals and departures. Many hotels will send a vehicle to pick up guests if you have arranged it. The Sheraton Addis, Dreamliner, Hilton Addis, most other hotels, and many popular guesthouses provide a regular shuttle service for guests. There is a public transport stop a bit outside, under the highway (Ring Road) bridge.
As of 2024, the airport is still more than 4 km (2.5 mi) from the closest Light Rail Transit station, which makes it unconnected in practice. That's not much less than the distance to central Addis, so for most travellers there's little use to go to and from the airport using light rail. In the future, a new line is planned to connect Bole Airport to the rest of the Light Rail Transit network.
There are fixed taxi fee of 150-300 birr to get from the airport to practically any place in the city center, as of April 2024 . Taxi drivers gather in a parking lot next to the airport. Most likely they will approach you shouting "Taxi!" Legitimate drivers should have their car marked in yellow/green color and place a license in a visible place.
Foreigners are often greeted by a throng of locals attempting to "help" load their luggage into cars. They're largely harmless and just looking for a tip, but it could be easy to lose a bag. An appropriate tip for a minor task like loading luggage into a car is 5 to 15 birr (ignore requests for more money just because you are a foreigner). If you have one person help you, twenty will ask for a tip. If you have a driver pick you up at the airport they will typically take care of any tips for you. Avoid walking alone around the airport, especially at night.
Get around
8°58′40″N 38°47′57″E
Map of Bole International Airport
Wait
Bole has three lounges at terminal 2 at gate A13:
Cloud-9 Lounge (Terminal 2, at gate A13). Open 24/7. A lounge reserved for business class passengers.
Sheba Platinum Lounge (Terminal 2, at gate A13). Open 24/7. A lounge reserved for ShebaMiles platinum members.
Star Alliance Gold Lounge (Terminal 2, at gate A13). Open 24/7. A lounge reserved for ShebaMiles gold members and all other Star Alliance carriers’s gold members.
In addition, Ethiopian Airlines also operates the Shebamiles Silver lounge, which is on the ground floor tucked in between terminal 1 and 2.
Eat and drink
Terminal 2
Cravings Restaurant & Bar
London Cafe Satellite Restaurant and Catering. Hot food, beer, coffee (updated Sep 2026)
Burger King. Fast food (updated Sep 2026)
Buy
Duty-free
Alfarag Duty Free has duty-free luxury goods for sale in terminal 1 and 2.
Connect
Wifi can be accessed anywhere in the airport for free, but you have to pay after 2 hours.
Cope
Sleep
8.9876738.79041 Ethiopian Skylight Hotel, Airport Road Addis Ababa 1755 (Airport Road & Ring Road), ☏ +251 11681 8181, reservation@ethiopianskylighthotel.com. Large and modern hotel owned by the Ethiopian Airlines. Has on-site restaurant. 24-hr free shuttle bus from the airport US$130+.  (updated Aug 2025)
Ethiopian Skylight In-Terminal Hotel (located airside near the B gates). 97 rooms. Price based on number of hours of stay and individuals in the room. (updated Oct 2025)
Nearby
