Document ID: ET132
Title: Arba Minch
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Arba_Minch
Source: Wikivoyage
Topic: travel-guide
License: CC BY-SA 4.0

Arba Minch
Arba Minch is a growing resort town in Southern Ethiopia, situated by two large lakes that are separated by a land bridge. The lakes are at different altitudes.
Understand
Arba Minch is a city in the southern region of Ethiopia. It is situated between Lake Abaya to the north and Lake Chamo to the south and is one of the main urban and tourism centres of southern Ethiopia.
Arba Minch is known for its lakes, forests, mountains and wildlife. The city lies at the edge of the Great Rift Valley and provides access to several natural attractions in the surrounding area.
The name Arba Minch means "forty springs" in Amharic, referring to the numerous springs traditionally associated with the area. The city is also sometimes called Ganta Garo.
Agriculture, trade, tourism and services are important parts of the local economy. Bananas, mangoes, coffee and other crops are cultivated in the fertile areas around the city.
History
Arba Minch developed as an important settlement in southern Ethiopia during the 20th century. Its location between two major lakes and close to the Rift Valley escarpment helped it become a regional centre.
The surrounding area has long been inhabited by different ethnic communities, including the Gamo people, whose language, traditions, agriculture and crafts remain important to the cultural identity of the region.
The city expanded as roads and other infrastructure connected southern Ethiopia with Addis Ababa and neighbouring regions.
Get in
There are many daily village buses from nearby towns, including Awasa and Wolaita Sodo.
Get around
Arba Minch is divided into two districts, Sikela and Secha, that are separated by a couple of miles. Frequent minibuses connect the two.
6°2′0″N 37°33′0″E
Map of Arba Minch
See
The main attraction is the Nech Sar National Park containing the two lakes. You can try to go for yourself. Go inside at the Main entrance (100 birr fee) per foot, bike or motorbike or even car. Forty Springs is located on the road 3 km inside from the entrance and can be reached by foot. The springs itself are unspectacular. You can also organise the boat safari (1200 birr) with the local guide association or by yourself upon arrival in the park. They will take you over Lake Chamo where you can see crocodiles (at a place called crocodile market) and various birds (2018). On the lake Abayo you reach the shore and a ferry station right behind the crocodile farm and you will walk around with a ranger and you could watch Monkeys, Hornbill, Zebra, Dikdik and other Antelope. 500 birr per person in total (2016) or just a tip for the ferry captain who shows you the way. Should be interesting finding out, where the locals go by these little ferry boats.
Do
Visit the Dorze Villages in the hills to the east. There are many smaller villages around Chencha. There are public busses leaving every hour from and to Arba Minch for 40 birr and taking 2 hours. You could go on your own, take a guide in Chencha or take a guide from Arba Minch to visit the Dorze. 250 birr for the guide (2016). There are many lodging options available in the Dorze villages.
If you go as far as Dorze Lodge, it's 25 birr for the bus (or about 400 birr, if you want to give a little Tuctuc a really hard time on the stony and steep road). From the road it's about 15 minutes by foot to the lodge. From the Lodge you can walk easily to the first village in 20 minutes, no guide needed (2018).
Buy
The Dorze sell handwoven colorful simple carpets.
Eat
6.00647937.5438121 Ezana Hotel. The courtyard of this pink hotel is a cheap place to eat, but the highlight is fast WiFi. French toast, eggs, and omelettes are available for breakfast. Traditional Ethiopian food, fish, and pasta for lunch and dinner.
Wubete Hotel (At the first roundabout in uphill Shecha). Luxurious and new restaurant, but excellent and decently priced. (2016)
Drink
Sleep
Connect
Go next
Wolaita Sodo - to the north
Chencha – in the hills to the west
Konso – to the south
