Document ID: ET145
Title: Ethiopia
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ethiopia
Source: Wikivoyage
Topic: travel-guide
License: CC BY-SA 4.0

Ethiopia
10.1.1 Changing cash
10.1.2 US dollar
10.1.3 Costs
18.3.1 Censorship and throttling
WARNING: The security situation in Ethiopia is volatile, especially in the north and west of the country as well as along its international borders. There are armed conflicts going on in several regions, including risk of air strikes, and risk for terrorism, violent crime and kidnapping in additional areas. Civil unrest, including protests and strikes, or government response, could deteriorate quickly and without warning.
Government travel advisories
Australia
Canada
New Zealand
United Kingdom
United States
(Information last updated 17 Jul 2026)
Travelers to Ethiopia (Amharic: ኢትዮጵያ ʾĪtyōpyā) experience a country divided into two: in the north and east the focus is on cultural heritage, while in the south there are several national parks and lakes in the area of the East African Rift with their flora and fauna as well as the habitat of several indigenous peoples.
Ethiopia is Africa's third-most populous country (after Nigeria and Egypt), oldest independent country and one of only two never colonised by a European power, save for a short Italian occupation in the 1930s and 1940s.
Regions
Central Ethiopia
The area traditionally known as Shewa, centred around the capital city of Addis Ababa
Northern Ethiopia
The historic heartland of the country, with highlands landscape and a cultural history very different from stereotypical Africa
Eastern Ethiopia
Predominantly Muslim areas, including the holy city of Harar
Southern Ethiopia
The diverse regions of the Rift Valley, with more typical East African savannah, lakes, and minority groups
Western Ethiopia
The least travelled area of the country, containing several ethnic groups
Cities
9.0338.741 Addis Ababa (Finfinne) — capital of Ethiopia and one of the biggest shopping cities in Africa
8.5539.272 Adama (formerly also known as Nazret or Nazareth) — popular weekend destination near Addis
14.1338.723 Axum (Aksum) — home of ancient tombs and stelae fields, in the far north
11.5937.394 Bahir Dar — monasteries on the islands of Lake Tana and the beautiful Blue Nile Falls nearby
9.5841.875 Dire Dawa — the second largest city; in the east
12.637.476 Gondar — some of East Africa's only castles
9.3142.137 Harar — ancient walled city near Dire Dawa
12.0339.048 Lalibela — is a town in the Amhara Region of Ethiopia. Home to 11 astonishing rock-hewn churches
13.4839.479 Mekele — a town in the Tigrayan Highlands in the north
6.85537.78083310 Wolaita Sodo — capital of South Ethiopia Regional State, on the north of Lake Abaya.
Other destinations
Ethiopia is ranked with African countries the likes of Kenya, South Africa, Tanzania and Zambia for preserving and maintaining its national parks as tourist attractions. The southern and south-western parts of the country are home to stunning natural beauty with a huge potential for tourism. The northern parts features cultural and religious attractions.
7.538.51 Abijatta Shalla Lakes National Park
6.9839.742 Bale Mountains National Park
9.3340.333 Awash National Park
5.6236.264 Mago National Park
Rift Valley lakes — seven lakes that are a popular weekend getaway for Addis residents, great for birding, water sports or relaxing at the luxury resorts
13.1838.066 Simien National Park
8.439.387 Sodere — spa town due to hot springs (filwoha)
5.3437.448 Konso and other Omo Valley tribes
13.9239.379 Rock-hewn churches of Gheralta mountains (near Hawzien) — tens of churches you can hike to
1440.510 Danakil Depression — a salt desert with several volcanoes including the active Erta Ale and the colorful Dallol
See also: the Ethiopia section of the UNESCO World Heritage List and the list of Ethiopian National Parks.
Understand
Capital
Addis Ababa
Currency
bir (ETB)
Population
Electricity
220 volt / 50 hertz (Europlug, Schuko, AC power plugs and sockets: British and related types, SN 441011, Type L, Type E)
Country code
+251
Time zone
UTC+03:00, East Africa Time, Africa/Asmara
Emergencies
911, +251-907 (emergency medical services), +251-939 (fire department), 991 (police)
Driving side
right
edit on Wikidata
History
Throne of Emperor Haile Selassie in the National Museum in Addis Ababa
Ethiopia is one of the oldest independent nations in the world, and the second Christian state (since at least AD 324, with Armenia the first, at AD 301). It has long been an intersection between the civilizations of North Africa, the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, Ethiopia is the place of the first Hijra (615 CE) in Islamic history, when the Christian king of Ethiopia offered refuge to those fleeing from Mecca and sent by the prophet Muhammad. Uniquely among African countries, Ethiopia was colonized for only 6 years, from 1936 to 1941, when it was under Italian military occupation. The only ever Muslim emperor was Lij Iyasu from 1913 to 1916, although Abyssinia faced a succession crisis in this era because Iyasu became a loyalist of Garad Diiriye Guure, whereupon his alliance with the Sultan Diiriye Guure Kingdom headquartered in Taleh led to Zewditu backed by the British attempted to overthrown him. Iyasu and Sultan Diiriye Guure were allied with the German empire and Ottomans although the central powers did not succeed in stopping British campaign to overthrow of both Garad Diiriye Guure in Taleh or Iyasu in Abyssinia. During this period, the Italians occupied only a few key cities and major routes, and faced continuing resistance until they were finally defeated during World War II by an Ethiopian-British alliance. Ethiopia has long been a member of international organizations: it became a member of the League of Nations, signed the Declaration by United Nations in 1942, founded the UN headquarters in Africa, was one of the 51 original members of the UN, and is the headquarters for, and one of the founding members of, the former Organisation of African Unity and the current African Union.
Ethiopia was historically called Abyssinia, a word related to Habesha, the native name for the inhabitants. In some countries, Ethiopia is still called by names cognate with "Abyssinia", eg, Turkish Habesistan, meaning land of the Habesha people. The English name "Ethiopia" is thought to be derived from the Greek word Αἰθιοπία (Aithiopia), from Αἰθίοψ (Aithiops) "an Ethiopian", derived from Greek terms meaning "of burnt (αιθ-) visage (ὄψ)". However, this etymology is disputed, since the Book of Aksum, a Ge'ez chronicle first composed in the 15th century, states that the name is derived from 'Ityopp'is, a son (unmentioned in the Bible) of Cush, son of Ham, who according to legend founded the city of Axum.
People
Ethiopia's population is highly diverse, consisting of more than 80 ethnic groups. The largest ethnic groups are the Oromo (34% of the population), the Amhara (27%) the Somalis (6%) and the Tigrinyas (6%). The largest religious affiliations are Christian (63% of the population – comprising 44% Ethiopian Orthodox and 19% other denominations) and Muslim (34%). Ethiopia once had a large Jewish community known as the Beta Israel, but most of the Beta Israel migrated to Israel in the late 20th century, and only about 12,000 remain in Ethiopia today.
Terrain
Much of Ethiopia is a high plateau with central mountain ranges divided by the Great Rift Valley, but there are low-lying lands in the eastern and westernmost parts, with the lowest point being the Danakil Depression, 125 m (410 ft) below sea level. The highest point is Ras Dejen (Ras Dashen) in the Simien Mountains, 4,620 m (15,160 ft) above mean sea level. The geologically active Great Rift Valley is susceptible to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
Ethiopia is landlocked – the entire coastline along the Red Sea was lost with the de jure independence of Eritrea on 24 May 1993. The Blue Nile, the chief head stream of the Nile, rises in Lake Tana in north-west Ethiopia. Three major crops are believed to have originated in Ethiopia: coffee, grain sorghum, and castor bean.
Climate
Climate map of Ethiopia
The predominant climate type is tropical monsoon, with wide topographic-induced variation. As a highland country, Ethiopia has a climate that is generally considerably cooler than other regions at similar proximity to the Equator. Most of the country's major cities are located at elevations of around 2,000–2,500 m (6,600–8,200 ft) above sea level, including historic capitals such as Gondar and Axum.
Addis Ababa, the modern capital, is situated in the foothills of Mount Entoto at an elevation of around 2,400 m (7,900 ft), and experiences a healthy and pleasant climate year-round. With fairly uniform year-round temperatures, the seasons in Addis Ababa are largely defined by rainfall, with a dry season Oct–Feb, a light rainy season Mar-May, and a heavy rainy season Jun-Sep. The average annual rainfall is around 1,200 mm (47 in). There are 7 hours of sunshine per day on average, 60% of the daytime hours. The dry season is the sunniest time of year, though even at the height of the rainy season in July and August there are usually several hours of bright sunshine a day.
The average annual temperature in Addis Ababa is 16 °C (61 °F), with daily highs averaging 20–25 °C (68–77 °F) throughout the year, and overnight lows averaging 5–10 °C (41–50 °F). A light jacket is recommended for evenings, though many Ethiopians dress conservatively and wear a light jacket even during the day.
Most major cities and tourist sites lie at a similar elevation to Addis Ababa and have comparable climates. In lower lying regions, particularly in the east of the country, the climate can be significantly hotter and drier. The town of Dallol, in the Danakil Depression in the east, has the world's highest average annual temperature of 34 °C (93 °F).
Pollution
Air quality in cities and along roads can be very poor because of emissions from badly maintained diesel vehicles and dust. Anyone sensitive to this should consider wearing a dust mask as is popular in many Asian countries. Pollution from plastic waste is severe in many areas of the country. Piles of discarded water/soft drink bottles line the sides of most roads and open areas with only the main tourist areas making any effort to keep their areas clean.
Time and calendar
Ethiopia uses the Ethiopian calendar, which dates back to the Coptic calendar 25 BC, and never adopted either the Julian or Gregorian calendar reforms. One Ethiopian year consists of twelve months, each lasting thirty days, plus a thirteenth month of five or six days (hence the "Thirteen Months of Sunshine" tourism slogan). The Ethiopian new year begins around 11 September (in the Gregorian calendar), and has accumulated 7–8 years lag behind the Gregorian calendar: thus, for the first nine months of 2023, the year was 2015 according to the Ethiopian calendar. On 12 Sep 2023, Ethiopia celebrated New Year's Day (Enkutatesh) for the Ethiopian year 2016.
In Ethiopia, the 12-hour clock cycles do not begin at midnight and noon, but instead are offset six hours. Thus, Ethiopians refer to midnight (or noon) as 6 o'clock. Airline timetables are based on the 24-hour clock and use the Gregorian calendar. To avoid confusion, Wikivoyage uses the 24-hour format in all Ethiopian listings.
Tourist information
Visit Ethiopia[dead link] website
Talk
Camera fees in Bahir Dar in Amharic and English
See also: Amharic phrasebook
Amharic is the first official language and lingua franca of Ethiopia. It is a Semitic language related to Hebrew and Arabic, and if you know either one you'll recognize some cognates. In all parts of the country, everyone speaks Amharic to some extent, no matter what their first language may be. The language is written in the Ge'ez script.
In big cities, many people under 40 speak some English. (English is the primary foreign language taught in schools and both the British Council and the EU have helped in providing textbooks.) In rural areas, find local school children to translate for you for a fee that could be next to nothing. (Ethiopians have a distinct way of speaking English. Because it is heavily accented, it might be a bit difficult to understand it at the beginning. However, when you get used to the way they pronounce some English words, it will become fairly understandable.) Older Ethiopians, especially those from the Tigray region or Eritrea (which was once a state of Ethiopia), may speak Italian, while other elders may speak Russian or Cuban-accented Spanish due to the influence of the former Derg regime.
In the Tigray region of north Ethiopia, Tigrinya, the lingua franca of neighbouring Eritrea, is the primary language, also written in Ge'ez. In the middle highlands regions Oromifa or Afaan, Oromo is widely spoken. Oromo uses a Latin alphabet. In the southern part of the country Wolayttattuwa is widely spoken. In the Ogaden region of Western Ethiopia, located mostly in Somali regional state (near the border with Somalia and Somaliland), Somali is common, and is written in a Latin alphabet; Arabic is also common, with a Yemeni influence. Towards the border with Djibouti, French becomes slightly more common.
Get in
A map showing the visa requirements of Ethiopia
Ethiopia
Visa-free
Visa on arrival or eVisa
eVisa
Visa required
Visa requirements
Ethiopian entry stamp
All visitors must obtain an entry visa, except for nationals from Djibouti and Kenya, and foreigners in transit at Addis Ababa Bole International Airport for 12 hours or less to catch an international connecting flight and who do not leave the airport or pass the Immigration Desk. Visas-on-arrival are also available to citizens of all African Union countries.
E-Visas are available to short-term visitors of all nationalities for tourism and business. The application is straightforward and takes only a few minutes to complete. You need to upload a scanned passport-style photo. Turnaround time might be within hours. You will receive an email welcoming you to Ethiopia. The official website to apply for E-Visa is https://www.evisa.gov.et – do not submit your application to any other similar looking website. E-Visa is only accepted at Addis Ababa Bole International Airport. Upon landing at the airport go to an immigration area and you will see a sign for E-Visa. You may need a printed version of your E-Visa, indicate a place of residence (hotel) and a phone number, which may be foreign.
You must indicate your intended place of residence and contact number to get a visa. Nothing appears to be checked, so in practice any hotel address and phone number should suffice. However, if you're unable to provide some address and phone number, they refuse to process the visa documents.
By plane
"Final approach to Addis Ababa International"
Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa is the main hub for Ethiopian Airlines, a member of the Star Alliance and one of the largest airlines in Africa. The airport also hosts Lufthansa, Sudan Airways, Kenya Airways, Turkish Airways, Emirates, Qatar Airways, Egypt Air and Fly Dubai. There are daily flights from Europe, the United States, Asia, and many African cities including Accra, Bamako, Brazzaville, Cairo, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Djibouti, Khartoum, Harare, Johannesburg, and Nairobi. From the U.S., there are direct flights from LAX, Newark Liberty, O'Hare International Airport and Washington, D.C., stopping over at either Dublin or Lomé. Bole's international terminal, Terminal 2, is said to be the largest in sub-Saharan Africa. Terminal 1 serves domestic and some regional (Djibouti, Nairobi, Khartoum, etc.) destinations.
Other international airports are in Dire Dawa, Mekele and Bahir Dar.
By car
Although more expensive than public transport, this is a good way to explore Ethiopia. There are few rent-a-car services in Ethiopia outside of Addis Ababa so you may prefer to depend on the services of touring companies that offer cars and 4x4s complete with driver.
Border crossings from neighbouring countries include the border village of Metema to get in from Sudan.
From Kenya the border town is Moyale. The road from Kenya to Ethiopia through the town of Moyale is much better and well maintained. The road between Nairobi and Moyale has been significantly improved in the mid 2020s, with the entire route now paved, making travel much faster and more comfortable than in the past. The road from Moyale into Ethiopia is also paved and generally in good condition. As with any long-distance road trip, travelers should check current road conditions and local travel advisories before departure, particularly during the rainy season or if traveling at night.
By bus
Public transport brings you to the border. With the Sudan or Kenya crossings, you just walk to the other side. If you arrive at the border towns late at night, try not to cross the border in the dark. Wait in the town and do your travelling in the morning.
Buses that cover some distance start in early morning. This implies that if you arrive during the day you would be stuck at least until the next morning.
From Gedaref (Sudan) catch a bumpy bus or truck (700 Sudanese pounds) to the border. The Sudanese side consists of several small villages and a tiny town. In Ethiopia you could find better, but basic, accommodation. Buses leaving for Gonder dry up by mid-afternoon so you must either arrive early at the border or spend the night in Metema (around 50 birr).
From Djibouti you can take a small bus to the border (2-3 hr) where you will find buses to Dire Dawa. This road is a dirt track and the trip takes at least half a day, at nightfall the bus uses to stop and you resume travel the next day. From Ethiopia into Djibouti, a bus leaves supposedly around midnight (buy tickets during the day at the office in the centre of Dire Dawa). This arrives at the Djibouti border in the morning where you change onto a different bus to get to Djibouti City. It is a good idea to take a tuk-tuk to the bus station as hyenas wander the streets of Dire Dawa at night.
By train
A train service between Addis Ababa and Djibouti City serves passenger trains taking roughly 12 hours for the whole trip.
The dilapidated but historical Chemin de Fer train station in downtown Addis Ababa is in the Kazanches neighbourhood near the
Sheraton Addis and may be of interest as a relic of the Ethio-Djibouti Railway that began service in 1890 during the reign of Emperor Menelik II. The new line does not serve the historic station.
Get around
By plane
Ethiopian Airlines is reasonably priced and has fairly comprehensive domestic services. Flights are often overbooked, so it is essential to reconfirm your tickets at least a day in advance and show up at the airport on time. If you forget to reconfirm, they may assume you aren't going to show up and give away your seats. Flights are frequently cancelled or rescheduled so allow extra time if transferring to an international flight.
As of 2020, Ethiopian Airlines has a mobile app that enables you to book and pay by credit card. The app is well designed but its reliability depends on the reliability of the mobile/wifi coverage in your location. If an Ethiopian ticket office is nearby it's often easier to go there. If you have booked your international trip to Ethiopia via Ethiopian Airlines you will get a 60% discount on domestic flights. Even if you have arrived on an airline other than Ethiopian, you can still get the discounted prices by having proof of an international reservation with Ethiopian regardless of whether you have flown the flight or not. So you can get the discount by booking a refundable (eco flex) or cheap flight to a neighbouring country for the future and quoting the ticket number when booking domestic flights. You need to have proof of your international ticket or reservation as you are often asked for it.
Chartered flights (both to serviced airfields and "bush flights") are available from Abyssinia Flight Services, on TeleBole road, just down the street from the airport. Helicopter service is available from National Airways, Abyssinia Flight Services, and certain government-owned companies.
By bus
Bahir Dar bus station
Ethiopian buses fit into one of the following categories: the ubiquitous minibuses or matatus (typically Toyota Highace vans that room up to 14 people) that operate throughout the region; small to large sized passenger buses called "Higer bus" (named after the manufacturer) that often travel between regions ("1st level" to "3rd level" indicating the class); luxury buses (Korean modern standard buses) going between the main cities, and the large (often double-jointed) red Addis Ababa city buses.
There is a comprehensive network of cheap Higer buses along the major roads, although these are slow and basic. Buses travelling shorter distances generally leave whenever they have filled up with passengers (in practice, these means once an hour or so); nearly all long-distance buses leave at dawn (06:00 or twelve on the Ethiopian clock). Buses do not travel at night; they will stop before sundown in a town or village with accommodation for the passengers, or, between Dire Dawa and Djibouti, just in the plain countryside. Between some cities (e.g., Adama and Addis Ababa), minibuses will run after the larger buses have stopped for the night. Everyone on the bus must have a seat by law – this prevents overcrowding, but often makes it difficult to catch a bus from an intermediate point on a route. If planning to travel by bus, keep in mind that almost all the vehicles are old and very dusty and many secondary roads are bad. The main roads are now at very good standard most places. Ethiopians do not like opening the bus windows, so it gets hot and stuffy inside by afternoon. If you like fresh air, sit as close to the driver or one of the doors as possible, as the driver keeps his window open and the conductor and his assistant often have the door windows open. It can be risky riding the minibuses and Higer, as they are a leading contributor to Ethiopia's position among the most dangerous places in the world to drive. The drivers often do not use mirrors and simply disregard the possibility of oncoming traffic when changing lanes.
The bus stations usually open around 05:00. If you are catching an early morning bus, you should get to the station at 05:00. They are very chaotic first thing in the morning, and many buses will sell out of seats before they leave with the dawn about 06:00. To make things easier and less stressful, you can often buy a ticket in advance. In Addis, find the correct window at the bus station the day before you wish to travel and buy your ticket there. You will need help finding the window unless you can read Amharic, but there are usually people around who will help if you ask. The ticket will be in Amharic, but there will be a legible bus number written on it somewhere. Simply find that bus the next morning at the bus station. In smaller cities, you can often buy your ticket from the conductor when the bus arrives from its previous trip the afternoon before you travel. Even if you already have a ticket, arrive early and claim a seat as soon as possible. If you don't have a ticket, you will have to ask people to show you the correct bus, unless you can read Amharic. In this case, don't waste time trying to buy a ticket from the window or from the bus conductor—push your way on board the bus and claim a seat! The conductor will sell you a ticket later. Medium-sized backpacks can usually be squeezed under the seats, but large packs and most luggage will have to go up on the roof. Claim your seat before you worry about your luggage. Luxury buses however have a really professional approach with both numbered seating and dedicated luggage compartments under the bus. Anyone assisting you with your luggage, including the person passing it up to the conductor's assistant on the roof, will expect a small tip (around 20-30 birr).
On several routes (Addis - Dire Dawa, Bahardar - Addis) you may also find informal traveller cars with no fixed departure; when looking around at a bus station you may be approached by somebody who offers you a faster connection by going with a private car; this is more expensive than the normal bus but also much faster. You'll be handed a phone number to call for an appointment. These cars may leave before sundown or travel even at night.
Selam Bus
By taxi
Here are some ride hailing apps that work in Ethiopia:
Little[dead link]
Feres[dead link]
Ride
ADIKA[dead link]
By car
A good way to tour Ethiopia is by car. You can take small aircraft to expedite your tour, but you will see more of the scenery if you travel by car. Reasonably priced touring companies include Galaxy Express Services [dead link], NTO [dead link], and Dinknesh, as well as Ethiopia Safaris and Journeys Abyssinia with Zawdu [formerly dead link] . They can take you off the beaten track so you can see the beauty and attractions of Ethiopia. Most car rentals mandate that the car comes with an Ethiopian driver, but a few companies rent cars for self-drive, such as NTO and ABC Car Rental. Cars will need to be picked up and dropped off in Addis. Expect to pay around $100/day for a self-drive SUV that is permitted to drive freely around the country. As of 2018, it is no longer necessary to convert to an Ethiopian driver's license, nor is an international driver's permit (IDP) required, as Ethiopia is one of the few countries that is not a signatory to either IDP convention. Driving on your foreign license and on a tourist visa is fine. All cars will be manual transmission, and despite the prices, don't expect a new vehicle.
Nevertheless, hiring a car is quite expensive, although hiring a car with a driver is typically not more expensive than self-drive. Drivers pass on their costs for spare parts and need to increase the price if fuel rises. A driver guide's credentials should be checked such as tourism license, insurance, engine (external and internal). Before accepting a contract, it is also a good idea to quiz the driver-guide about tourism routes. When driving to the "deep south" of Ethiopia also check the license plates, because the authorities in the south check in and log "3" plate tourism cars, take the names of the passengers and passport number. They need a letter from the tour company to show the agent is bona fide on some routes and parks. Petrol costs 21 birr a litre (US$ 0.70, Jan 2020). Make sure to check the pump is zeroed before re-fuelling starts.
Highway in Awash
There are several highways in Ethiopia, some of these are in good condition:
Road 1: Addis Ababa-Asmara via Dessie and Mekelle
Road 3: Addis Ababa-Axum via Bahir Dar and Gonder
Road 4: Addis Ababa-Djibouti via Nazret (Adama), Awash and Dire Dawa
Road 5: Addis Ababa-Gambela via Alem Zena and Nekemte
Road 6: Addis Ababa-Jimma via Giyon
Road 48: Nekemte-Gambela National Park via Gambela
TAH 4 to the north: Cairo via Khartoum and Bahir Dar
TAH 4 to the south: Cape Town via Gaborone, Lusaka, Dodoma, Nairobi and Awasa
TAH 6 to the east: Djibouti via Dessie
TAH 6 to the west: Ndjamena via Darfur
By bicycle
Road conditions vary considerably around Ethiopia; some roads are smoothly sealed while others consist mostly of large stones. Accommodation is cheap and available in almost every village, although these "hotels" usually double as bars and brothels. Food and drink are also easily available. You will attract considerable attention. It is not uncommon for whole schools to empty out as the children run after you. Be prepared to have stones and sticks thrown at you, especially in the south.
By train
Addis Ababa light railway has two routes in the central part of Addis. The long unused railway system has been reinvigorated with a new Chinese-built standard gauge line from Addis Ababa to Djibouti City that opened in 2018. While this line is primarily intended for freight transport, it also enables both domestic and international passenger transport.
See
Tomb of Adam, Lalibela
Huge obelisks in Axum
Historic routes, churches and mosques Lalibela, Axum, Gondar, Harar
Volcanic lake Danakil Depression and Erta Ale
Rift Valley lakes Wonchi crater lake, Langano, Tana
National Parks such as Menengesha
Churches, including many beautiful ones in Addis Ababa
Rock-hewn churches in Lalibela
Castles in Gondar
Itineraries
Northern historic circuit. A loop from Addis Ababa to Bahir Dar on Lake Tana, to Gondar, then Axum, and Lalibela, and back to Addis. Other stops can be included, such as Simien National Park, Adwa and nearby Yeha, Hawzien and Mekele. The circuit can also be done in the opposite direction. Destinations can be reached affordably by domestic airlines but you may want to consider taking the bus journey from Addis to Bahir Dar to experience the awe-inspiring and switch-backing descent from the highlands deep down into the gorge of the Blue Nile and back up again and for the abundant wildlife you'll see on this stretch of the road. A new paved road is in place and has, in synergy with the Luxury bus companies, turned this gruelling bus trip into quite a decent trip (March 2015).
Do
Tribal region safari in the Lower Omo Valley
Trekking in Dodolla, Bale Siemien Mountains National Park
Bird watching in Rift Valley lakes
See the gelada ("baboons") at Debre Sina near Addis Ababa
White water rafting in the Omo River
Attend a traditional coffee ceremony.
Visit an azmari bet (azmari bar) to listen to azmari musicians and singers.
For where to go to see Ethiopia's wildlife, all images taken by Wikimedia Commons user Charlesjsharp have precise geolocation information [1].
The images can be found in galleries of mammals [2] and birds [3] etc.
Buy
Money
Exchange rates for Ethiopian birr
As of July 2026:
US$1 ≈ 160 birr
€1 ≈ 180 birr
UK£1 ≈ 215 birr
Exchange rates fluctuate. Current rates for these and other currencies are available from XE.com
Local currency is the Ethiopian birr, denoted by the symbol "Br" or "ብር " (ISO currency code: ETB). Wikivoyage articles use birr to denote the currency.
It is one of the more stable African currencies. There are 100 santim to the birr and coins come in denominations of 1-, 5-, 10-, 25 and 50 santim and one birr. Banknotes of Ethiopia come in denominations of 1, 5, 10, 50, 100 and 200 birr.
There are ATMs in most towns, even smaller ones. Dashen Bank, Commercial Bank of Ethiopia and Awash Bank are your best bet for finding an ATM that takes Visa, MasterCard and Chinese credit/debit cards. Don't expect foreign Cirrus or Plus cards to work. The ATMs are not always reliable, so try another and have a back-up plan for cash.
Opportunities to use credit/debit cards (Visa and MasterCard) are increasing in Addis Ababa, but remain rare elsewhere.
Changing cash
Any commercial bank in Ethiopia can exchange cash. The rates are the same everywhere and are set by the central bank daily. There are hundreds of commercial bank branches in Addis Ababa, including in the Sheraton and Hilton hotels, and in the corner of the baggage claim hall at the airport. Most cities and towns that tourists visit will have at least one commercial bank, except for villages in the Omo valley. Many hotels will convert US dollars to birr at the front desk. Because of forgeries in circulation, banks might not accept US dollar notes printed before 2002, or torn or very worn notes. It is illegal to change money on the black market but the rates are better than offered by the banks: when the official rate was 28, the black market rate in Addis Ababa was 30 and in Lalibela 32. Ask anyone and they find someone willing to change hundreds of US dollars. You can check the black market exchange rates online here.
US dollars, euros or pounds sterling are the best currencies to carry, in that order. It is best to bring US dollars with you into the country. High denomination notes are preferred ($50 or above) - you will often get a better exchange rate for them. You can only bring in a maximum of US$3000. You may find it best to keep most of your cash in your home currency and take out what you need daily. Additionally, since ATM machines dispense money in birr, it may be easier to simply withdraw money from the ATM as needed. Prices are extremely low in Ethiopia and a US dollar will go a long way.
Banks no longer accept travellers cheques.
US dollar
In cities like Addis Ababa and to a much lesser extent Dire Dawa, the US dollar is mostly accepted. In some shops in Addis Ababa the prices will be written in birr and USD. Some ATMs in Addis Ababa give out both US dollars and birr. Most hotels in Addis Ababa accept US dollars. All airports in Ethiopia accept US dollars.
You cannot obtain US dollars in Ethiopia through legal means unless you have a flight ticket to leave the country. This means that if you need US dollars (e.g. to get a Djibouti visa) and don't have a flight ticket to leave Ethiopia you will need to either change money on the black market (not recommended) or ensure that you have enough US dollars on you.
Costs
Ethiopia is relatively cheap for tourists, compared to other African countries.
To stay at a 5-star hotel in Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa, Nazret, Bahir Dar, Gondar and Awasa costs on average 3,000 birr per night (as of 2020). On the other hand, budget double room around the country is 250-1000 birr per night.
Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa and Adama/Nazret have the most expensive prices in the country. Food is also expensive if you buy it in those city's centres.
You need about 1500 birr per day for hotel, food, lodging and transport. In Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa you can need 2500 birr per day (as of 2020).
Tipping
In Ethiopia tipping is common in hotels, restaurants and bars. One is also expected to tip car park attendants whether hired by institutions or self-assigned. In some restaurants it is customary to tip any dancers, and this is usually done by sticking the paper money on the forehead of the dancer.
Eat
Price guide:
8-12 birr - Soft drinks: Coca Cola, Fanta, Sprite, 7 Up, Mirinda or Pepsi
10-25 birr - Juice
15-20 birr - Dessert pastries
30-50 birr - Breakfast
40-60 birr - Injera with all kinds of wat (garnishings)
80 birr - Pizza, hamburger, fish 'n chips or spaghetti
80-200 birr - Cake
100-150 birr - Asian or African restaurant
250 birr plus - Luxury restaurants, hotels, restaurants catering to expats
Injera with various kinds of stews
Injera is ubiquitous in Ethiopia. It is a spongy, tangy-tasting bread made from the grain teff, which grows in the highlands of Ethiopia. It looks and feels akin to a crepe or pancake. It's eaten with wot (or wat), traditional stews made with spices and meat or legumes. Popular wats are doro (chicken) wat, yebeg (lamb) wat and asa (fish) wat. Pork is rare in Ethiopia as both the Ethiopian Church and Islam prohibit the consumption of pork by their followers.
The injera sits directly on a large round plate or tray and is covered with wat placed symmetrically around a central item. The various wats are eaten with other pieces of injera, which are served on a side plate. Injera is eaten with the right hand - rip a large piece of injera from the side plate and use it to scoop up one of the flavours of wat on the main platter. Eating with the left hand is considered disrespectful, as it is the hand traditionally used for personal hygiene and is thus considered unclean. Another popular injera dish is firfir: fried, shredded injera. It can be served with or without meat or with all sorts of veggies.
If you prefer vegetarian food, try the shiro wat, which is an oily bean stew served with injera. Shiro is common on Ethiopian "fasting days", in which devout Ethiopians eat an essentially vegetarian diet.
One of Ethiopia's most famous dishes is tibbs or tibs, spicy beef or lamb fried in butter (nitre kibbeh). Tibs comes in several styles, most commonly "chikina tibs", fried in a sauce with berbere spice, onions, bell peppers, and tomato; and zil-zil tibs, a more deep fried breaded version served with tangy sauces. Equally as famous is kitfo, minced meat spiced with chilli. You can have it raw (the locally preferred way, but there's a risk of getting parasites), leb-leb (lightly cooked) or fully cooked. It comes with a local cheese, ayeb, and spinach. In the Harar region, you can find kitfo derivatives including camel meat. Many restaurants that serve kitfo include it in their name (e.g. Sami Kitfo, Mesob Kitfo) but typically serve a wider selection than just raw meat.
For the pickier visitor, almost every place in Ethiopia also serves spaghetti, thanks to its short lived Italian occupation, but not as Italians would know it. Italian restaurants are common, as are so-called "American style pizza and burger" places that have little in common with American pizzas and burgers. There is continued demand for more American-style dining in Ethiopia, not only from expats but from Ethiopians as well. You will find westerners or western-raised Ethiopians everywhere in the capital who can be very helpful.
Common spices include berbere, Ethiopia's national spice which includes fenugreek; mittmitta, another piquant spice; and rosemary, which is used with almost all meat in the country. Most local meats are of poor quality and are stringy and tough even when cooked perfectly. Luxury hotels and restaurants will often import meat from Kenya which is of much higher quality.
Drink
Ethopian coffee
Ethiopian macchiato, the country's famous coffee drink
Ethiopian coffee is among the best in the world and is the historical origin of the coffee bean. Coffee is traditionally served in a formal ceremony that involves drinking a minimum of three cups of coffee and eating popcorn. It is a special honour or mark of respect to be invited into somebody's home for the ceremony. Ethiopians tend to drink their coffee either freshly brewed and black, very strong, with the grounds still inside, or as a macchiato, Ethiopia's popular form of coffee.
In preparation for the ceremony, the coffee beans are roasted in a flat pan over charcoal. The beans are then ground using a pestle and mortar. The coffee is brewed with water in a clay coffee pot and is considered ready when it starts to boil. Coffee in Ethiopia is served black with sugar; some ethnic groups may add butter or salt to the coffee, but will generally not do so with foreigners. Beware, after drinking coffee in Ethiopia, you will find yourself always disappointed with the quality of coffee when you return home. In Ethiopia, the coffee is so fresh as it is usually roasted the same day it's consumed. You will dream about coffee for weeks after leaving Ethiopia.
Alcoholic drinks
Tej. A honey wine that is similar to mead and frequently drunk in bars, in particular, in a tej beit (tej bar). It strongly resembles mead in flavour, though it typically has a local leaf added to it during brewing that gives it a strong medicinal flavour that may be off-putting. It is considered manly to consume this beverage.  (updated Jan 2026)
A variety of Ethiopian beers are available, all of which are quite drinkable. Many breweries that were formerly owned by the Ethiopian government are now owned by Western beverage companies like Heineken (Harar beer) and Diageo (Meta beer). The nationally ubiquitous beer is St. George, or "Giorgis", named after the patron saint of Ethiopia, which is a light lager similar to American beers that has been brewed in Addis Ababa since 1922. Other popular local brands include Habesha, Dashen and Bedele (all good quality). Ethiopian breweries rival many microbreweries in the West, and most beers are sold for under US$1.
Ethiopian wines, both red and white, exist but are generally considered undrinkable by foreigners.
Sleep
There is a wide range of accommodation in Ethiopia. Staying in tourist areas generally results in a broader range of choices, but watch out for tourist prices. It is acceptable to bargain with the hotel owner, for they usually tend to charge you "faranji" (foreigner) prices at first, which are often twenty times the local rate. You won't be able to bargain down to local prices (close to nothing) but you can bargain down a lot. This is not true at the government run "Ghion" chain, and the fancier private chains as well, where prices for foreigners are fixed. (Bekale Mola, for example).
Guest houses are common in Ethiopia. These vary from large homes with a number of bedrooms to small hotels and essentially operate as a "Bed and Breakfast". Some have shared baths, other have private baths. The best ones have generators available to deal with power outages as well as internet service and satellite TV. The good ones tend to be clean and they treat you like family. They are much cheaper than the brand name hotels and you will get more exposure to the local culture. If you tip well you will be treated like royalty.
In the north, in every city (Axum, Lalibela, Bahir Dar, Gondar) one can find hotels, from overpriced ones such as the government-run Ghion chain hotels to cheaper ones. Smaller places on the major roads offer cheap places if you do not mind the most basic rooms. A tourist town like Debark that serves for trekking the Simien Mountains also offers a range of rooms, with the most popular being the Simien Park Hotel (25/30 birr), where you could also pitch a tent for 20. It meets the normal standards for food, electricity, water, cleanliness and hygiene.
In the south, all the cities (Shashemane, Wondo Genet, Awasa, Arba Minch, Jinka...) have decent, cheap hotels. The most basic rooms start at 15 birr for a single and 20 birr for a double. Many of them don't have hot water and electricity all hours of the day, so you should schedule time for a shower in advance. There are also three fairly expensive resort hotels on the shore of Lake Langano. In the smaller villages in and around the Omo valley (Weyto, Turmi, Key Afar, Dimeka, Konso, etc.) there are usually few (very basic) or no hotels, but if you are travelling through the valley to see the tribes, there is always a campground or a restaurant that offers beds. If you camp out at one of these villages, you should hire a guard to watch over your stuff overnight.
Work
Ibex next to a road
Most of the following applied to Ethiopia until the 2021 civil war. Check current conditions after the war ends.
At least until 2021, Ethiopia had one of Africa's strongest economies. Unemployment was low, and with a rapidly growing economy, Ethiopia was becoming more and more interesting as an expat destination.
In the big cities, especially Addis Ababa:
There was a high demand for IT professionals.
Many start-up companies searched for individuals with computer networking and consulting backgrounds.
Addis Ababa has the most NGOs in Africa, and possibly among all third world countries. They are reputed for providing generous salaries to their employees.
Many expatriates work in NGOs and small start-up IT companies.
Compared with other African cities, Addis Ababa has a high number of big, medium and small sized computer training schools, and governmental and private learning institutions. Many students who attend hope to obtain an IT or consulting job, in the very scarce job market of the city.
Some people have a desire to do some sort of charitable work while in Ethiopia. There are many opportunities to volunteer in and around Addis Ababa. Organizations such as Love Volunteers and Projects Abroad[dead link] offer a range of volunteer projects including teaching English, caring for children and healthcare. Many non-profit organizations produce goods that they sell to help fund their efforts. Most locals at hotels and guest houses can point you to them. Abebech Gobena Yehetsanat Kebekabena Limat Mahber [dead link] is a great example. Missionaries of Charity started by Mother Teresa of Calcutta have a centre near Sidest Kilo in Addis Ababa.
Many visitors bring donations to Ethiopia. Although most anything is appreciated, there are things very difficult to get in Ethiopia that make great donations. Soy formula for orphanages is a great example as lactose-intolerant babies need this to thrive and it is hard to find in-country. High quality soccer footballs (what would be considered cheap footballs at USD10-15 in Western countries) are hard to find as well. Deflate a football and you can get over 30 in a large bag. You will be seen as a hero when you give them away at orphanages and schools.
Stay safe
There are many ongoing inter-ethnic conflicts. Borders between ethnic regions tend to be high-risk areas. In addition, many groups are in conflict with the government.
Due to the general security situation, expect a heightened security presence. Be prepared for checkpoints, having your identity and travel documents with you. As anywhere, take care to respect road blocks (even if they appear unattended), remain calm and follow instructions.
Communications and availability of food, water and other necessities can be disrupted. Have a contingency plan.
Landmines are a threat in some regions.
See also War zone safety.
Stay healthy
Gelada baboons
Don't drink the tap water. It's full of parasites, and hotels generally recommend guests not to drink it, nor to eat salads and uncooked foodstuffs that are usually washed in tap water. This applies to ice as well – unless it is distilled, or you are at a reputable Western hotel like the Sheraton, Radisson Blu, or Hilton. Bottled water for drinking is available almost everywhere in small, medium and big bottles – popular brands are Yes (flat water) and Ambo (sparkling water). Make sure you drink enough, especially when the weather is hot.
Consult a doctor before going to Ethiopia about what vaccinations against infectious diseases you should consider. The risk of malaria is low to non-existent in the capital and the highlands, but high in the lake regions and lowlands. Doxycycline for malaria prevention is cheap in Addis.
If you get sick, go to one of the big private hospitals, e.g., Korean, Hayat, St Gabriels.
A large part of Ethiopia is at a high elevation. In those areas, people unaccustomed to breathing in thinner air may have a hard time moving around at first. It is advised to allow yourself a few days to acclimatize to the air. See altitude sickness.
Respect
Ramadan
Ramadan is the 9th and holiest month in the Islamic calendar and lasts 29–30 days. Muslims fast every day for its duration and most restaurants will be closed until the fast breaks at dusk. Nothing (including water and cigarettes) is supposed to pass through the lips from dawn to sunset. Non-Muslims are exempt from this, but should still refrain from eating or drinking in public as this is considered very impolite. Working hours are decreased as well in the corporate world.
Exact dates of Ramadan depend on local astronomical observations and may vary somewhat from country to country. Ramadan concludes with the festival of Eid al-Fitr, which may last several days, usually three in most countries.
If you're planning to travel to Ethiopia during Ramadan, consider reading Travelling during Ramadan.
Ethiopians are very proud of their culture, identity, and country. Avoid criticizing their cultural lifestyle, especially their brand of Christianity (Ethiopian Orthodox). Avoid all contentious religious discussion, or you may risk all good will and hospitality you could have been afforded. Rather than argue about the merits of Orthodoxy or Islam, it's best to ask friends to explain their customs, festivals and beliefs and to listen with respect.
The Ethiopians' relationship with the Westerners is generally free of racial animosity. However, there is considerable suspicion and even xenophobia toward foreigners in the countryside. Ethiopians can be short-fused if they feel they are not treated as equals.
It is a sign of respect for men to avoid eye contact with women. If you are a foreign man, maintaining a formal distance from women will be seen as good manners. If you meet a woman who is with a man, ask the man's permission before talking to her. Likewise, if you're a foreign woman in public with a man, don't be upset if Ethiopian men address all questions to him. They will do this not to slight you but to show respect. This will be the case on public transport and in restaurants.
It is very important to remove your shoes when entering a home.
Connect
Telephone
The country code for calling Ethiopia is 251. The city code for Addis Ababa is 011 (or 11 from outside Ethiopia).
Mobile
Unlike most countries, even within Africa, roaming in Ethiopia with your home country's carrier is very expensive and is often not covered by discounted roaming packages, and many traveler eSIMs don't even support the country at all. As such it is highly recommended to get a local SIM card while in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia has two mobile phone networks - Ethio Telecom (Ethiotel) and Safaricom. Safaricom launched its network in 2022 and is rolling it across the country. Safaricom has the main cities covered but Ethiotel has the most extensive coverage in small towns and rural areas. Both networks offer 3G, 4G and 5G service with good data speeds. In general calls, SMS and mobile data, especially with a data package, offered by both carriers is extremely cheap. For example, as of 2025, a 30-day plan with unlimited data from Ethiotel costs 1300 birr (or about US$8.50 in 2025).
To avoid getting ripped off, the best place to buy a SIM card is at a Ethio Telecom or Safaricom shop. Both have shops in the arrivals area of the airport in Addis Ababa. The system requires the seller to take a photo of you and your passport information to activate your SIM. You'll have to sign an agreement that you will not commit any crimes with your phone. All local stores will have calling cards you can purchase to call internationally. For domestic calls, phones are topped up with a prepaid card, available in denominations of 2000, 500, 100, 50 and 25 birr and smaller.
Satellite phones and VSAT devices are heavily restricted or illegal without hefty fees and licenses.
Internet
Ethiopia is one of the least connected countries in the world. As of 2022, internet penetration in Ethiopia is 25% of the total population and internet service is extremely limited outside of major cities. That said, Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa are well-served by high-speed internet. WhatsApp works well for voice and video calls.
Censorship and throttling
Most Ethiopian Internet Service Providers, such as Ethiotel, block certain websites as well as throttle web traffic. Moreover, they will typically block regular VPN connections, so your standard VPN may be unusable. There are a couple ways around this. One is to use a VPN provider that offers an obfuscation or "stealth" mode (such as Proton's Stealth or NordVPN's Obfuscated Servers). Another is to use the free, open-source TOR Project browser, although performance is likely to be significantly slower compared to using an obfuscated VPN, particularly on mobile networks.
Mail
Mail does not get delivered to home addresses in Ethiopia. You are required to rent a post office box. Ethiopia has one of the most efficient postal services in Africa. Many attribute this success to the extensive network of Ethiopian Airlines.
Newspapers
English language papers include Capital and The Reporter.
