Document ID: ET157
Title: Omo National Park
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Omo_National_Park
Source: Wikivoyage
Topic: travel-guide
License: CC BY-SA 4.0

Omo National Park
Omo National Park is in south-western Ethiopia, towards the border with South Sudan and Kenya, and west of the Omo River.
Understand
Located in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region on the west bank of the Omo River, the park covers approximately 4,068 square kilometres (1,571 sq mi), about 870 kilometres (540 mi) southwest of Addis Ababa; across the Omo is the Mago National Park and the Tama Wildlife Reserve.
History
Omo National Park was founded in 1980. In October 2008, African Parks announced they were giving up the management of the Omo National Park and leaving Ethiopia. African Parks stated that sustainable management of the Ethiopian parks is incompatible with 'the irresponsible way of living of some of the ethnic groups. The organization has trouble dealing with the indigenous population trying to continue its traditional way of life within the park borders.
Landscape
Major land features include the Omo River on the east, the Maji Mountains, the Sharum, and Sai plains to the north and west, and the Illibai plains and Dirga Hills to the south. There are three hot springs, and the park is crossed by some rivers, all of which drain into the Omo. The Mui River crosses the middle of the park before joining the Omo River. Much of the park is at 800 metres (2,600 ft) but the southern part by the Neruze River drops to 450 metres (1,480 ft). The highest peak of Maji Mountains which is located within the park is 1,541 metres (5,056 ft) above sea level.
Flora and fauna
The park offers excellent opportunities to view wildlife with 73 species of mammals and 312 species of birds. It is home to large herds of buffalos, zebras, elands, beisa oryxes, tiangs, Lelwel hartebeests, dik-diks, bushbucks, reedbucks, and Grant's gazelles. Other mammals that are elusively rare to find include elephants, lions, leopards, cheetahs, bushpigs, African wild dogs, giraffes, oribis, klipspringers, greater kudus, hyenas, black rhinoceros, hippopotamuses, and warthogs. Primates such as the Mantled guerezas, Olive baboons, and De Brazza monkeys also live within forested areas.
The vegetation of Omo National Park is mostly open savannah, thickets, and riverine woodland.
Climate
Get in
Although an airstrip was built near the park headquarters on the Mui River, this park is not easily reachable; the Lonely Planet guide Ethiopia and Eritrea describes Omo National Park as "Ethiopia's most remote park."
Fees and permits
Get around
See
Do
Buy
Eat
Drink
Sleep
Lodging
Camping
Backcountry
Stay safe
Go next
